TRANSLATIONS OF PICPUZ

The instructions here apply to the GUI interface (menus and dialogs).
For user guide translations, see below.

INTRODUCTION TO TRANSLATION FILES

Translation files for picpuz are located here:
   /usr/share/picpuz/locales/translate-lc.po.gz

This is the installed translation file for language "lc".
It may or may not be compressed (.gz ending).

"lc" is a standard 2-character language code, e.g. "de" for German,
or a combination language and region code formatted "lc_RC", e.g.
"de_AT" for Austrian German. This code normally corresponds to the
locale of the computer, as shown by the command: $ echo $LANG

If there is no installed translation file for "lc", you can use the
dummy translation file for "en" (english) as a template. Replace the
translations of "english to english" with "english to new-language".

The translation files in /usr/share/picpuz/locales/ are protected
and cannot be edited unless you have root privileges. It is better
to copy a translation file to a more convenient location for editing.

The .po file contains the English phrases used by picpuz, with the
corresponding translations for language "lc" (or "lc_RC"). It can be
edited with any text editor.

A typical translation in the .po file looks like this:
   msgid "The file name is: %s \n"
   msgstr "Der Dateiname ist: %s \n"

"msgid" is an English text needing a translation. "msgstr" is the
translation (German in this case). The special codes "%s" and "\n"
are for inserted data and formatting. In the translation, these
codes must match with the English in both type and sequence.

A missing translation looks like this:
   msgid "The file name is: %s \n"
   msgstr ""

TO REVISE A TRANSLATION

   1. Edit translate-lc.po to add or update translation strings.
   2. Replace the original file in /usr/share/picpuz/locales/.
   3. Option: compile the .po file to check for errors:
      $ msgfmt -v --check-format -o /dev/null translate-lc.po
   4. Run picpuz and check how the translations look. If the
      computer locale is not "lc" you can start picpuz in the
      target language with the command: $ picpuz -l lc
   5. Send the modified .po file to kornelix@posteo.de
      so it can be included in future releases.

Step 3 is optional. The usual binary translation files (.mo) that are
output by msgfmt are not needed by picpuz. The translation source
files (.po) are read directly by picpuz, and changes made to a .po
file are effective the next time picpuz is started. Step 3 is useful
to find errors (e.g. missing or non-matching format codes).

Whenever picpuz is started from a terminal, missing translations
are listed in the terminal window.

PROBLEMS WITH LONG TRANSLATIONS

English can be terse compared to other languages (e.g. "undo" is
"Rückgängig machen" in German), and this can cause ugliness in the
GUI layouts. Therefore try to make dialog labels and buttons short,
and look closely at the resulting GUI layout.

CONTEXT DEPENDENT TRANSLATIONS

Sometimes the same English text will need multiple translations that
depend on context. A simple example is "save file" when used on a
toolbar button or in a menu. On the button the translation should be
short, but there is no limit for the menu. In German, this could be
"speichern" for the button and "in eine Datei speichern" for the menu.
The standard method to do this in Gnu gettext is fairly horrible, but
since picpuz reads the source translations (.po files) instead of
the binaries (.mo files), a simpler method is available. The English
text may include an extra string to distinguish different contexts.
This context string is removed from the GUI output, so the user does
not see it. The context string is any short string followed with the
special marker "::". To continue our example, the translate-lc.po
file might look like this:
   msgid "save file"
   msgstr "in eine Datei speichern"
   msgid "toolbar::save file"
   msgstr "speichern"
In English, picpuz would show "save file" for both cases, and in
German "in eine Datei speichern" or "speichern".

USER GUIDE TRANSLATION

The user guide is normally found here:
   /usr/share/picpuz/data/userguide-lc.html  (or -lc_RC.html)

The file is a text HTML file, which may be edited with any HTML editor.

If a file with the region code is present, this file is used by picpuz,
otherwise the standard language version is used. If this is not found,
the English file (userguide-en.html) is used.

If you make a new or revised translation, please send it to
kornelix@posteo.de  so it can be included in future releases.


